transforming the digital platform the foundation for digital transformation is a clean, wellstructured digital platform the technology, applications, and data that power a company's business processes. digital partnering creates growth by adding more products and customers via digital connections with other companies that enable fast response to customer needs. in other companies, it and digital and business leaders are working more closely together to make the digital transformation faster, more innovative, more comprehensive, and more effective than before. digital readiness partnering in digital ecosystems requires drivers and their partners to be fully prepared to create and extract value. its experience illustrates how successful digital partnering requires digital readiness that consists of three key characteristics: being distinctive, being digitally organized, and being open. digital ecosystems in the top quartile on digital readiness had an average market share that was 110 higher than the average market share of the bottom quartile. digital partnering for competitive advantage none of the six characteristics of digital readiness and curation are easy to attain and sustain, which may explain much of the variation in the performance of ecosystems. accordingly, we have revisited the elements of digital capability to reflect the opportunities and impact of new digital technologies. transforming the customer experience seeing the business from the outside in from the customers' perspective is as relevant and necessary today as it was in the first phase of digital transformation. by transforming the learning and development function, these leaders ensure that employees have the capabilities they need to embrace digital technology and drive business transformation. this has become more worrisome than ever: as covid19 accelerates the shift to digital activity, digital masters are widening the gap between their capabilities and those of their competitors. we see three elements supporting business model transformation: digital enhancements, informationbased service extensions, and multisided platforms. in 10 years of research, we have seen digital transformation grow increasingly complex, with a new wave of technological and competitive possibilities arriving before many companies mastered the first. digital enhancements: business model transformation does not always require disrupting a company or industry. highperforming drivers also eliminate internal silos, use agile methodologies, and leverage data analytics all of which help them to design for speed and agility when working with digital partners. together, these two capabilities allow a company to transform digital technology into business advantage. for example, as personal investors navigate life events, they can easily access a variety of offerings, such as student loan refinancing and mediation and legal services, through the company's digital partners. many of the companies we studied experimented with digital partnering to complement their core offering by curating products of interest to their customers. this operational transformation is occurring in three elements of digital capability: core process automation, connected and dynamic operations, and datadriven decisionmaking. today, enterprise architecture involves componentizing a company's key outcomes products, customer experiences, and core enterprise processes and assigning clear accountability for each component. in doing so, climate emphasized data privacy and its guiding principle to make it easy and safe for farmers to share their own data with the digital partners they choose. the digital platform has three interrelated but distinct elements that work together to power your company. customer data is carmax's business engine, and the implementation of an enterprisewide customer relationship management system to componentize, capture, and manage that data was a major architectural effort. references d i g i ta l b you s i n e s s driving growth in digital ecosystems h ighgrowth companies do not go it alone. you will need to evolve into a digital company, addressing the experience challenge without compromising product excellence and innovation. flexforcing: to respond to fastpaced digital opportunities and threats, companies also need to build agility into their talent sourcing systems. transforming employee experience if we have learned anything during the past decade of digital transformation, it is that employees can be either the greatest inhibitors or the greatest enablers of transformation success. they need to consider how digital technologies can be used not only to enhance their products and processes but also to reinvent their businesses. along with these technology and architecture elements, we have seen the dawning of a hardwon recognition of the importance of the it function in making digital transformation work. in this article, we have shared examples that can help executives identify opportunities to increase digital capability across the business. the company introduced its first three teams around 2015 to address what management viewed as an urgent need to improve its online customer experience. developing the right capabilities for digital partnering is key to getting value from your ecosystem strategy. in the fieldview ecosystem, all partners, whether a startup or major company, must agree that farmers will control their own data and choose the partners with whom they will share data. now, companies are considering how robotics and other digital technologies can augment employee productivity and performance enabling people to work faster, smarter, and more safely. last, we have given more prominence to the digital platform that underpins all the other elements in a company. now, executives in every industry are paying closer attention to how digital prowess can yield business model innovation. to better understand digital partnering in ecosystems, we studied the practices and results of ecosystem drivers. many first wave digital transformations did not include it as a partner and failed; now, it leaders are driving efforts in some companies. to attract partners, a digital ecosystem needs to provide differentiated value that enables it to stand out from its competitors. we found that the more successful drivers attended to two principal partnering capabilities: digital readiness and curation. drivers and their partners need operating models that are optimized for digital ecosystems. digital threads connecting machines, models, and processes provide a single source of truth to manage, optimize, and enhance processes from requirements definition through maintenance. curation enables drivers to coordinate effectively with their digital partners while creating and growing an ecosystem. some companies have successfully graduated from the first phase of digital transformation and are diving into the second. transforming operations as ever, wellmanaged operations are essential to converting revenue into profit, but now we are seeing a shift in the focus of digital transformation in this arena. advances in technology and methodology in recent years have made the challenge of building a solid digital platform simultaneously easier and tougher. employee experience has expanded from a single element to its own set of elements, since employees make the business run and have firsthand insights on where processes need to improve. now, it leaders are driving digital transformation in some companies. we found that digital connections between companies via apis have significantly increased in the past two years. the food and agriculture company is shifting its mix to incorporate more digital than inperson experiences even for senior executives and learners appreciate the change.