spring 2021 special special collection collection brought to you by: moving toward digital transformation is not an allor nothing process. there are ways to move forward incrementally. how to embrace digital transformation first steps contents special collection how to embrace digital transformation first steps 1 the new elements of digital transformation 8 driving growth in digital ecosystems 13 why you yes, you need enterprise architecture the authors revisit their landmark research and address how the competitive advantages offered by digital technology have evolved. by didier bonnet and george westerman d i g i ta l b you s i n e s s the new elements of digital transformation s ince 2014, when our article "the nine elements of digital transformation" appeared in these pages, executive awareness of the powerful and everevolving ways in which digital technology can create competitive advantage has become pervasive. but acting on that awareness remains a challenging prospect. it requires that companies become what we call digital masters . digital masters cultivate two capabilities: digital capability, which enables them to use innovative technologies to improve elements of the business, and leadership capability, which enables them to envision and drive organizational change in systematic and profitable ways. together, these two capabilities allow a company to transform digital technology into business advantage. digital mastery is more important than ever because the risks of falling behind are increasing. in 10 years of research, we have seen digital transformation grow increasingly complex, with a new wave of technological and competitive possibilities arriving before many companies mastered the first. when we began our research, most large traditional enterprises were using digital technologies to incrementally improve parts of their businesses. since then, this first phase of activity has given way to a new one. advances in a host of technologies, such as the internet of things, artificial intelligence, virtual and augmented reality, and 5g, d i g i ta l b you s i n e s s have opened new avenues for value creation. more important, leaders now recognize the need for and the possibility of truly transforming the fundamentals of how they do business. they understand that they have to move from disconnected technology experiments to a more systematic approach to strategy and execution. some companies have successfully graduated from the first phase of digital transformation and are diving into the second. but many are still floundering: in 2018, when we surveyed 1,300 executives in more than 750 global organizations, only 38 of them told us that their companies had the digital capability needed to become digital masters, and only 35 said they had the leadership capability to do so. this has become more worrisome than ever: as covid19 accelerates the shift to digital activity, digital masters are widening the gap between their capabilities and those of their competitors. these conditions prompted us to reexamine the elements of digital transformation that we proposed in 2014. while strong leadership capability is even more essential than ever, its core elements vision, engagement, and governance are not fundamentally changed, though they are informed by recent innovations. the elements of digital capability, on the other hand, have been more profoundly altered by the rapid technological advances of recent years. accordingly, we have revisited the elements of digital capability to reflect the opportunities and impact of new digital technologies. some of the original elements remain relatively unchanged, some have been reconfigured, and some new elements have emerged. see "the new elements of digital capability." the elements aimed at improving customer experience and internal operations remain important. employee experience has expanded from a single element to its own set of elements, since employees make the business run and have firsthand insights on where processes need to improve. the elements of business model innovation have expanded, too, with the rise of multisided platform businesses and the increasing dominance of global platform players, such as alibaba, amazon, and google. last, we have given more prominence to the digital platform that underpins all the other elements in a company. transforming the customer experience seeing the business from the outside in from the customers' perspective is as relevant and necessary today as it was in the first phase of digital transformation. but while the focus on customers has not radically changed, the elements needed to create compelling experiences have changed. today, the three elements are experience design, customer intelligence, and emotional engagement. experience design: customer experience has become the ultimate battleground for many companies and brands. while compelling experiences are easy to recognize, they are hard to design and deliver. that is because this work requires equal measures of empathic creativity and technological prowess. the former requires tools such as journey mapping, "a day in the life" ethnographic studies, and customer personas, as well as practices such as design thinking. these tools and practices provide an intimate understanding of human behaviors and the ability to surface customer insights through careful observation, skilled listening, and constant experimentation. the latter is powered by the ability to digitally reengineer customer experiences, by integrating frontoffice technologies and processes with backoffice operational infrastructure to instantaneously deliver an uninterrupted service experience, for instance. sephora transformed longstanding customer pain points around sampling and purchasing cosmetics into a compelling, digitally powered customer experience. workers in huntington ingalls industries' newport news, virginia, shipyard use augmented reality to help build giant complex vessels such as aircraft carriers and submarines. but companies that cannot create their own multisided platforms can still use platform economics to partially transform their business models or find an economically viable role to play in platforms operated by others. in recent years, we have seen a tremendous increase in algorithms that use unstructured data such as text, images, and voice to improve customer experience or internal operations, making data platforms a key component of digital innovation. highperforming drivers also eliminate internal silos, use agile methodologies, and leverage data analytics all of which help them to design for speed and agility when working with digital partners. as fidelity's brokerage business transformed from a mainframe environment to a cloud environment, the company built enterprisewide capabilities that promote openness by launching an api store and establishing companywide standards designed to make the apis easily consumable both internally and externally. in other cases, businesses join the platform because their retail partners and farmer customers request integration. every negative customer interaction via a company app, website, telephone call, or service provider exposes your architectural inadequacies. early research findings indicate that componentization helps organizations use data more effectively and respond to business opportunities faster. each of those first teams owned responsibility for one of three missions: descriptions and pictures representing each individual car, online display of those pictures and descriptions, and underlying infrastructure supporting the website. about the author jeanne ross and cynthia beath are coauthors of designed for digital: how to architect your business for sustained success mit press, 2019. ross was principal research scientist for mit's center for information systems research for almost 27 years. pdfs reprints permission to copy back issues articles published in mit sloan management review are copyrighted by the massachusetts institute of technology unless otherwise specified. mit sloan management review articles, permissions, and back issues can be purchased on our website, shop.sloanreview.mit.edu , or you may order through our business service center 9 a.m. 5 p.m. et at the phone number listed below. reproducing or distributing one or more mit sloan management review articles requires written permission.